docs/input.rst, before:

.. _sec-input:

=============
How it works?
=============

******************************
Program parameters and options
******************************

Mostly used
-----------

-vcf [*file*]
    File path of the isolate vcf. Assume all variants are ``PASS`` in the ``QUAL`` column, the VCF file also reqires the ``AD`` field.

.. note::
    In the current implementation, ``DEploid`` only take the first sample in the VCF file. ``DEploid`` DO NOT handle multi-allelic variants, nor indels. The ``FILTER`` column will not be used.


-plaf [*file*]
    File path of population level allele frequencies (tab-delimited plain text file), for example

.. csv-table::
    :header: CHROM, POS, PLAF
    :widths: 1,1,1

    Pf3D7_01_v3,93157,0.0190612159917058
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94422,0.135502358766423
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94459,0.156294363760064
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94487,0.143439298925837

-panel [*file*]
    File path of the reference panel (tab-delimited plain text file), for example

.. csv-table::
   :header: CHROM, POS, 3D7, Dd2, Hb3, 7G8
   :widths: 15, 10, 5, 5, 5, 5

    Pf3D7_01_v3,93157,0,0,0,1
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94422,0,0,0,1
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94459,0,0,0,1
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94487,0,0,0,1


-noPanel\
    Use population level allele frequency as prior.

.. warning::
    Flags **-panel** and **-noPanel** should not be used together.

-exclude [file]
    File path of sites to be excluded (tab-delimited plain text file).

-o [string]
    Specify the file name prefix of the output.

-k [int]
    Number of strain (default value 5).

-seed [int]
    Random seed.

-nSample [int]
    Number of MCMC samples (default value 800).

-rate [int]
    MCMC sample rate (default value 5).

-burn [float]
    MCMC burn rate (default value 0.5).

-ibd\
    Use IBD segment to infer the proportion, then infer the haplotype.

-painting [*file*]
    Paint the posterior probability of the given haplotypes.

-inbreeding\
    Calculate the inbreeding probabilities.

-h , -help
    Help.

-v , -version
    DEploid version.

-vcfOut\
    Save final halpotypes into a VCF file.

You may also try
----------------

-ref [file] -alt [file]
    File path of reference and alternative allele count (tab-delimited plain text file).

.. note::
    In early ``dEploid`` versions (prior to `v0.2-release`), allele counts extracted from the vcf file are placed in two files, and parsed by flags **-ref [file]** and **-alt [file]**. Tab-delimited plain text for input. First and second columns record chromosome and position labels respectively.  Third columns records the reference allele count or alternative allele count. For example,

.. csv-table:: Reference allele count
    :header: CHROM, POS, PG0390.C
    :widths: 1,1,1

    Pf3D7_01_v3,93157,85
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94422,77
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94459,90
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94487,79

.. csv-table:: Alternative allele count
    :header: CHROM, POS, PG0390.C
    :widths: 1,1,1

    Pf3D7_01_v3,93157,0
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94422,0
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94459,0
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94487,0

.. warning::
    Flags **-ref** and **-alt** should not be used with **-vcf**.

-forbidUpdateProp\
    Forbid MCMC moves to update proportions.

-forbidUpdateSingle\
    Forbid MCMC moves to update single haplotype.

-forbidUpdatePair\
    Forbid MCMC moves to update pair haplotypes.

-exportPostProb\
    Save the posterior probabilities of the final iteration of all strains.

-miss [float]
    Miss copying probability

-recomb [float]
    Constant recombination probability

-initialP [float ...]
    Initialize proportions.

-p [int]
    Output precision (default value 8).


.. _sec-eg:

***************************
Example of data exploration
***************************


Use our data exploration tools to investigate the data.

::

    $ R --slave "--args -vcf data/exampleData/PG0390-C.eg.vcf.gz
     -plaf data/exampleData/labStrains.eg.PLAF.txt
     -o PG0390-C " < utilities/dataExplore.r


.. image:: _static/PG0390-CaltVsRefAndWSAFvsPLAF.png
   :width: 1024px
   :alt: Plot alternative allele and reference allele counts to identify evidence of mixed infection in *Pf3k* sample PG0390-C.


- Figure on the left plots the alternative allele count against the reference allele count. As *P. falciparum* genomes are haploid, in clonal samples, one woule expect to see either alternative or reference allele at any sites. Heterozygous sites are indications of mixed infection.
- Figure in the middle is the histogram of the allele frequency within sample.
- Figure on the right show allele frequency within sample, compare against the population average.

.. .. note::
..     The population level allele frequencies can be extracted from simple scripting.

Commit message:

update input data filtering plot

docs/input.rst, after:

.. _sec-input:

=============
How it works?
=============

******************************
Program parameters and options
******************************

Mostly used
-----------

-vcf [*file*]
    File path of the isolate vcf. Assume all variants are ``PASS`` in the ``QUAL`` column, the VCF file also reqires the ``AD`` field.

.. note::
    In the current implementation, ``DEploid`` only take the first sample in the VCF file. ``DEploid`` DO NOT handle multi-allelic variants, nor indels. The ``FILTER`` column will not be used.


-plaf [*file*]
    File path of population level allele frequencies (tab-delimited plain text file), for example

.. csv-table::
    :header: CHROM, POS, PLAF
    :widths: 1,1,1

    Pf3D7_01_v3,93157,0.0190612159917058
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94422,0.135502358766423
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94459,0.156294363760064
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94487,0.143439298925837

-panel [*file*]
    File path of the reference panel (tab-delimited plain text file), for example

.. csv-table::
   :header: CHROM, POS, 3D7, Dd2, Hb3, 7G8
   :widths: 15, 10, 5, 5, 5, 5

    Pf3D7_01_v3,93157,0,0,0,1
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94422,0,0,0,1
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94459,0,0,0,1
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94487,0,0,0,1


-noPanel\
    Use population level allele frequency as prior.

.. warning::
    Flags **-panel** and **-noPanel** should not be used together.

-exclude [file]
    File path of sites to be excluded (tab-delimited plain text file).

-o [string]
    Specify the file name prefix of the output.

-k [int]
    Number of strain (default value 5).

-seed [int]
    Random seed.

-nSample [int]
    Number of MCMC samples (default value 800).

-rate [int]
    MCMC sample rate (default value 5).

-burn [float]
    MCMC burn rate (default value 0.5).

-ibd\
    Use IBD segment to infer the proportion, then infer the haplotype.

-painting [*file*]
    Paint the posterior probability of the given haplotypes.

-inbreeding\
    Calculate the inbreeding probabilities.

-h , -help
    Help.

-v , -version
    DEploid version.

-vcfOut\
    Save final halpotypes into a VCF file.

You may also try
----------------

-ref [file] -alt [file]
    File path of reference and alternative allele count (tab-delimited plain text file).

.. note::
    In early ``dEploid`` versions (prior to `v0.2-release`), allele counts extracted from the vcf file are placed in two files, and parsed by flags **-ref [file]** and **-alt [file]**. Tab-delimited plain text for input. First and second columns record chromosome and position labels respectively.  Third columns records the reference allele count or alternative allele count. For example,

.. csv-table:: Reference allele count
    :header: CHROM, POS, PG0390.C
    :widths: 1,1,1

    Pf3D7_01_v3,93157,85
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94422,77
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94459,90
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94487,79

.. csv-table:: Alternative allele count
    :header: CHROM, POS, PG0390.C
    :widths: 1,1,1

    Pf3D7_01_v3,93157,0
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94422,0
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94459,0
    Pf3D7_01_v3,94487,0

.. warning::
    Flags **-ref** and **-alt** should not be used with **-vcf**.

-forbidUpdateProp\
    Forbid MCMC moves to update proportions.

-forbidUpdateSingle\
    Forbid MCMC moves to update single haplotype.

-forbidUpdatePair\
    Forbid MCMC moves to update pair haplotypes.

-exportPostProb\
    Save the posterior probabilities of the final iteration of all strains.

-miss [float]
    Miss copying probability

-recomb [float]
    Constant recombination probability

-initialP [float ...]
    Initialize proportions.

-p [int]
    Output precision (default value 8).


.. _sec-eg:

***************************
Example of data exploration
***************************


Use our data exploration tools to investigate the data.

::

    $ utilities/dataExplore.r -vcf data/exampleData/PG0390-C.eg.vcf.gz \
     -plaf data/exampleData/labStrains.eg.PLAF.txt \
     -o PG0390-C


.. image:: _static/PG0390-CaltVsRefAndWSAFvsPLAF.png
   :width: 1024px
   :alt: Plot alternative allele and reference allele counts to identify evidence of mixed infection in *Pf3k* sample PG0390-C.

- Figure on the top plot total allele counts across all markers. We use the threshold (red line) to identify markers with extremely high allele counts. Red crosses indicate markers that are filtered out.
- Figure on the left plots the alternative allele count against the reference allele count. As *P. falciparum* genomes are haploid, in clonal samples, one woule expect to see either alternative or reference allele at any sites. Heterozygous sites are indications of mixed infection.
- Figure in the middle is the histogram of the allele frequency within sample. Note that we exclude markers with WSAF strictly equal to 0s and 1s in the histogram.
- Figure on the right show allele frequency within sample, compare against the population average.

.. .. note::
..     The population level allele frequencies can be extracted from simple scripting.
